Introduction
Fever is one of the oldest clinical indicators of disease in the mammalian host as well as one of the most common reasons for medical consultations worldwide [1], [2]. Fever often occurs in response to infection, inflammation and trauma. However, this view of fever is merely an oversimplification as a growing body of evidence now suggests that fever represents a complex adaptive response of the host to various immune challenges whether infectious or non-infectious. Although elevated body temperature is an indispensable component of the febrile response, it is not synonymous with fever. It is generally agreed that fever is a regulated rise in body temperature above normal daily fluctuations occurring in conjunction with an elevated thermoregulatory set point [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. To highlight the adaptive nature of the febrile response, the International Union of Physiological Sciences Commission for Thermal Physiology in 2001 defined fever as a state of elevated core temperature, which is often, but not necessarily, part of the defensive responses of multicellular organisms (host) to the invasion of live (micro-organisms) or inanimate matter recognised as pathogenic or alien by the host [6].
The complexity of the febrile response may be attributable to its multi-systemic effects orchestrated by endocrine, neurological, immunological and behavioural mechanisms. Apart from a regulated rise in body temperature, fever is also accompanied by various sickness behaviours, changes in metabolic and physiological characteristics of body systems and alterations in immune responses [2], [3]. The febrile response, therefore, remains a significant contributor to the pathogenesis, clinical presentation and outcome of many illnesses and diseases. Consequently, understanding fever and febrile response is vital in the diagnosis, treatment and follow-up of various ailments and diseases.
This review gives an overview of the pathophysiology of the febrile response and describes the fever types and patterns, including their clinical significance. The various medical illnesses called “fever” are also listed and the origins of their appellations discussed.
Thermoregulation
In healthy individuals, body temperature varies in relation to several environmental and biological factors such as time of day, site of temperature measurements, level of physical activity, age, sex and race, among others [2], [7]. In spite of this variability, body temperature is tightly regulated within a fairly constant range-a thermal set point (recently renamed thermal balance point [8]) through the process of thermoregulation.
The old view that temperature regulation functions as a unified control system with a single thermoregulatory centre has been rejected. Based on recent evidence, core temperature is regulated by various relatively independent thermoeffector loops, each having its own afferent and efferent branches [7], [8], [9]. Hence, the regulation of body temperature is dependent on a thermoregulatory circuitry. However, the preoptic region of the anterior hypothalamus is still considered the major thermoregulatory centre in the CNS where peripheral and centrally generated temperature signals are received and integrated [7], [8], [9].
The preoptic region consists of heat sensitive neurons, namely warm and cold sensitive neurons, which are activated or inhibited in response to temperature changes. In cold environments, decrease firing of warm sensitive neurons and increase firing of cold sensitive neurons leads to activation of heat gain mechanisms and prevention of heat loss (i.e. by skin vasoconstriction, piloerection, decrease sweating, increased muscle contraction, non-shivering thermogenesis, and seeking warm clothing or environments). In hot environments, increase firing of warm sensitive neurons and decrease firing of cold sensitive neurons leads to activation of heat loss mechanisms and inhibition of heat gain mechanisms (i.e. by sweating, removal of clothing or seeking cold environments). Ultimately, body temperature is kept within a normal regulated limit by a delicate balance between heat loss and heat gain.
Defining normal and febrile body temperatures
Due to wide variability of body temperature in relation to several factors, defining febrile body temperatures remain a subject of controversy with varied definitions by different authors. However, most authors [2], [3], [4] are in agreement with a study in which modern calibrated thermometers were used to measure 700 baseline-oral temperatures of 148 middle aged healthy adults of different races [10]. In this study, the mean oral temperature was 36.8 ± 0.4 °C (98.2 °F) and body temperature exhibited a circadian rhythm with 99th percentile of the population having maximum morning (at 6.00 am) of 37.2 °C and maximum afternoon (at 4.00 pm) temperature of 37.7 °C. Thus, on the basis of this study data, fever in healthy middle aged adults may be defined as early morning oral temperature of >37.2 °C (>99 °F) or a temperature of >37.7 °C (>100 °F) at anytime during the day.
Based on guidelines for management of febrile illnesses provided by authorities such as World Health Organization (WHO) [11], [12] and the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA) [13], among others [14], [15], equivalent rectal temperature of ≥38 °C (100.4 °F) or axillary temperatures of ≥ 37.5 °C (99.5 °F) are indicative of fever in both adults and children. However, as compared to older children and adults, infants and young children experience higher and more prolonged fevers, more rapid temperature increases, and greater temperature fluctuations [15]. In the geriatric group (>65 years), who are likely to have lower body temperatures, IDSA defines fever as single oral temperature >100 °F (>37.8 °C); or (2) repeated oral temperatures >99 °F (>37.2 °C) or rectal temperatures >99.5 °F (>37.5 °C); or (3) an increase in temperature of >2 °F (>1.1 °C) over the baseline temperature [16].
Of the three major sites (i.e. rectal, oral and axillary) used for temperature assessment, rectal temperatures more closely estimate core temperatures than oral temperatures or axillary temperatures [2], [8]. Although, axillary temperatures are convenient to undertake, they are the least accurate method of temperature measurement, especially in adults. Axillary thermometers take longer time to reach equilibrium and they are altered by various factors such as by ambient temperature, sweat, humidity and the density of hair in the axilla [2], [8].
Pathophysiology of the febrile response
The development of the febrile response is akin to the normal thermoregulatory processes that follow exposure to cold temperatures. However, in fever the thermal balance point is reset to a higher level such that normal peripheral and central body temperatures are now sensed as cold temperature signals by the thermoregulatory circuitry [2], [3], [4], [5]. Consequently, fever is different from heat stroke and hyperthermia where body temperature is elevated without a corresponding elevation of the thermal balance point.
Like thermoregulation, evolving evidence suggest that the generation of fever follows multiple independent afferent and efferent mechanisms depending on the site, nature and severity of inflammation. The various biological molecules involved in the generation of the febrile response and the pathways implicated in these responses are discussed in the following section.
Fever: the role of pyrogens and cryogens
The initiation, manifestations and regulation of the febrile response are dependent on the pyrogenic and anti-pyretic properties of various exogenous and endogenous substances [2], [17], [18]. While pyrogens directly or indirectly lead to fever, cryogens prevent excessive temperature elevation. It is the balance in the interactions between pyrogens and cyrogens that determine the height and duration of the febrile response to any immune challenge.
Pryogens
Pyrogens are classified into exogenous (produced outside the host) and endogenous (produced within the host) pyrogens based on their site of production. Exogenous pyrogens are, essentially, part or whole micro-organisms or products of micro-organisms such as toxins. The gram negative cell wall component –lipopolysaccharide (LPS), remains the most widely studied exogenous pyrogen and most of the current data of the febrile response are based on studies using LPS as the pyrogenic agent. Other clinical significant endogenous pyrogens include muramyl dipeptidase – a constituent of cell walled micro-organisms, and enterotoxins of Staphylococcus aureus and group A and B Streptococcus collectively named superantigens [2], [4].
Endogenous pyrogens are mainly pyrogenic cytokines including interleukins (IL) 6, IL-1, interferon gamma (INF-γ) and ciliary neurotropic factor (CNTF) and tumour necrosis factor (TNF α), among others [2], [4]. However, TNF α has both pyrogenic and antipyretic actions depending on experimental conditions [17]. Endogenous pyrogens are produced by immune cells such as neutrophils, macrophages and lymphocytes as well as by endothelial cells, astrocytes and glial cells in response to exposure to exogenous pyrogens. Certain endogenous substances such as antigen-antibody complexes, inflammatory bile acids, complements and various lymphocyte derived molecules may however serve as pyrogens without induction by exogenous pyrogens [2].
Cryogens
Cyrogens include anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-10), hormones (e.g. α-melanocyte stimulating hormone, corticotrophin and corticotrophin releasing hormone) and many other neuroendocrine products (e.g. neuropeptide Y, bombesin, and thyroliberin), cytochrome P-450 (P-450), among others [2], [17], [18]. They exert their anti-pyretic effects by inhibiting synthesis of pyrogenic cytokines (e.g. glucocorticoids), cytokine receptors blockade (e.g. IL-1 receptor antagonist), and increasing heat loss by enhancing sensitivity of warm sensitive neurons (e.g. bombesin) [2], among other mechanisms. These endogenous antipyretic systems protect the host against the destructive consequences of unchecked fever.
The fever pathways
Fever signals carried by exogenous and endogenous pyrogens ultimately lead to reset of the thermoregulatory circuitry via two basic pathways, namely the humoral and neural pathways (reviewed in Refs. [19], [20], [21]).
The humoral pathway
In this pathway, fever signals are carried by components of microbial products named pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPS) or by pyrogenic cytokines.
Circulating PAMPS of micro-organisms, typified by gram negative LPS, are known to bind toll like receptors 4 (TLR-4) on various cells [22]. By binding to and activating TLR-4 located on the fenestrated capillaries of the circumventricular organ in the blood brain barrier, they lead to release of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) from the arachidonic acid pathway in cytoplasmic membranes [22], [23], [24]. Prostaglandin E2 is small molecule that easily diffuses across the blood brain barrier, binds to specific PGE2 receptors (EP3 receptor) in the preoptic area and then activates thermal neurons in the anterior hypothalamus to a higher thermal balance point [2], [22], [23], [24]. It is unclear whether microbial products also lead to elevation of the thermal balance point by gaining direct access to the brain through disruption of the BBS.
The febrile response is characterised by an early rapid phase and a delayed late phase. Based on studies undertaken in animal models with polyphasic LPS-induced fever, it is believed that the first phase of this febrile response is dependent on PGE2 synthesized in the liver and lungs before migration to the brain, while the latter phases are due to centrally synthesized PGE2 [25], [26]. Consequently, while peripheral synthesized PGE2 may act to initiate the febrile response, centrally synthesized PGE2 may be largely involved in its maintenance.
The second humoral pathway is directed by circulating pyrogenic cytokines. They transmit fever signals to the thermoregulatory circuitry by both indirect and direct pathways. In the indirect pathway, pyrogenic cytokines act outside the brain by binding and activating cytokine receptors located on the fenestrated capillaries of the circumventricular organ leading to release of PGE2 [2], [3], [27]. In the direct pathway, circulating cytokines disrupt the blood brain barrier gaining direct access to cytokine receptors expressed on vascular, glial and neuronal structures of the brain [27]. Activation of these central receptors stimulates further synthesis of PGE2 or promotes de novo synthesis of more cytokines by the brain.
Although PGE2 remains fundamental in the febrile response, some cytokines and many other inflammatory mediators may activate the febrile response independent of PGE2 [19]. Direct PGE2-independent activation of the thermal neurons by cytokines may be responsible for the hyperpyrexia seen in CNS infections and haemorrhages – the latter also referred to as central fever [3]. In these conditions, the anti-pyretic properties of the CNS are disrupted, leading to unregulated rise in body temperature. Examples of inflammatory mediators, other than PGE2, that may reset the thermal balance point independent of PGE2 include, bradykinin, corticotrophin releasing hormone, nitric oxide, MIP-1, IL-6, and IL-8, preformed pyrogenic factors (PFPF), substance P and endothelin-1 [19].
The neural pathway
Peripheral fever signals can communicate with the CNS through peripheral nerves such as cutaneous sensory nerves and the vagus nerve. The activation of the neural pathway is believed to be another mechanism by which fever is rapidly initiated [19], [20], [21].
It has been suggested that localised formation of PGE2 at sites of inflammation contribute to fever generation by activating cold-sensitive cutaneous nerves, which, in turn, transmit fever signals to parts of the brain responsible for fever generation [28]. The transmission of fever signals via the vagus nerve follows a more complex pathway. Circulating pyrogens such as LPS activate complement and complement products in turn stimulate Kupffer cells of the liver to produce endogenous mediators including pyrogenic cytokines. These cytokines activate the hepatic branch of the vagus nerve which then transmits fever signals to the central projection of the area of the vagus nerve within the nucleus of tractus solitarius (NST). From the NST, the signal proceeds to the preoptic and hypothalamic areas via the ventral noradrenergic bundle, causing the intrapreoptic release of norepinephrine [19], [21].
Norepinephrine mediates the vagal pathway by evoking distinct core temperature rises. The first is alpha (1)-adrenoceptor (AR)-mediated, rapid in onset, and PGE2-independent, while the second is alpha (2)-AR-mediated, delayed, and PGE2-dependent [19], [21].
The role of vagal afferents in fever generation was based on experimental studies in rats which showed that surgical vagotomy lead to attenuation or complete abortion of febrile responses to pyrogenic signals [19], [20]. However, more recent studies have challenged this view, attributing the lack of febrile response to pyrogenic signals to the side effects of vagotomy, such as malnutrition [29], [30]. When such side effects of vagotomy are avoided, experimental studies in rats suggest that complete or partial vagotomy did not abort the febrile response to pyrogenic signals such as intravenous PGE2 [29].
Symptoms of fever
The reset of the thermal balance point to a higher level by humoral and neural fever signals described above initiates a feedback loop that lead to sequence of clinical and behavioural manifestations that characterise the febrile response. To meet the new balance point, heat loss is inhibited by skin vasoconstriction (leading to chills and goose pimples), as well as by behavioural mechanisms such as assuming a fetal position to reduce body surface area or wearing thick clothing and seeking warmer environments [2], [5]. Various heat gain mechanisms are then activated including increase muscle contraction (leading to rigors). When the fever signal is no longer present in the CNS, the balance point drops to normal with activation of heat loss mechanisms such as sweating. Hence, fever is often characterised by chills, rigors, rise in body temperature and subsequently sweating and fall in body temperature.
Systemic symptoms such as headache, malaise, anorexia and other sickness behaviours may also accompany fever. These symptoms are due to the systemic effects of microbial products and pyrogenic cytokines that lead to various acute phase responses mediated through the neuroendocrine system [2], [5]. Fig. 1 gives a summary of the pathways leading to fever and associated acute phase responses.
Classification, types and patterns of fever
Fevers can be arbitrary classified into acute, sub-acute and chronic fevers based on duration. Acute fevers (<7 days in duration) are characteristics of infectious diseases such as malaria and viral-related upper respiratory tract infection while sub-acute fevers (usually not more than 2 weeks in duration) may be seen in cases of typhoid fever and intra-abdominal abscess, among others [3]. Chronic or persistent fevers (>2 weeks duration) are typical of chronic bacterial infections such as tuberculosis, viral infections like HIV, cancers and connective tissue diseases [3]. However, any cause of acute fever can become persistent or chronic if untreated.
Based on the height of body temperature, fever can also be classified into low grade, moderate grade, high grade and hyperpyrexia (Table 1)[31], [32]. The height of body temperature may have some diagnostic and prognostic implications. Some studies have attributed high grade fevers in infants to serious bacterial infections [33], although others have also shown that children with high fevers are at equally high risk for serious bacterial infections and for viral illness [34].
The height of fever may occasionally correlate with severity of illness, as suggested in experimental shigellosis and dengue virus infection [35], [36], as well as in acute falciparum malaria where presence of hyperpyrexia denotes complicated disease with poor prognosis [37]. However, the overall clinical state of the patient is a more powerful predictor of serious illness than the height of the fever [15].
Three major fever types have been described including sustained/continuous fever, intermittent fever and remittent fever [31], [38]. Figs 2 and 3 illustrate these major fever patterns. Continuous or sustained fever is defined as fever that does not fluctuate more than about 1 °C (1.5 °F) during 24 h, but at no time touches normal [38]. Continuous fevers are characteristics of lobar and gram-negative pneumonia, typhoid, acute bacterial meningitis, urinary tract infection, among others [31]. Fever characterised by slow stepwise temperature rise and a high plateau are classical of typhoid fever (Fig. 2) [39]. However, this fever pattern is reported in only about 12% of cases in clinical practice [39], possibly because most patients with fever self-medicate with antibiotics and anti-pyretics before consulting a health personnel. Fever associated with relative bradycardia (temperature pulse dissociation or Faget's sign) is a feature of untreated typhoid, leishmaniasis, brucellosis, Legionnaire's disease and psittacosis, Yellow Fever, among others [40].

Familial Mediterranean fever	A hereditary autoinflammatory autosomal recessive disorder characterised by recurrent bouts of fever and peritonitis, sometimes with pleuritis, skin lesions and arthritis.	People with genetic origins in the Mediterranean basin are most commonly affected. Up to 50% of patients have a family history of the disorder, usually involving siblings.
Fort Bragg fever	A mild form of anicteric leptospirosis caused by Leptospira autumnalis, more common in children, and characterised by an abrupt ‘toxic’ state, with fever, shaking chills, headache, etc.	First observed among military personnel at Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
Fever of unknown origin (FUO)	Classical FUO is defined as (1) a temperature greater than 38.3 °C (101 °F) on several occasions, (2) more than 2 weeks’ duration of illness, and (3) failure to reach a diagnosis despite 3 days of inpatient investigation or >2 days out-patient visits	Also known as pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO) –no known aetiology
Glandular fever	Viral infection caused by the Epstein-Barr virus presenting as fever, sore throat, swollen lymph nodes and lethargy.	So named because of effects on glands (lymph nodes).
Fictitious fever	Elevated body temperature falsely induced by either manipulation of the thermometer or self-injection of contaminated material. Common in young women, especially in those who are frequently allied with health professions.	So named because fever is falsely induced.
Hay fever	Also known as Allergic rhinitis – an allergic inflammation of nasal airways due to exposure to allergen from pollen or dust. Rose fever is a form of hay fever caused by grass pollens released while roses or other flowers are blooming.	Hay is the allergen – i.e. grass, legumes or other herbaceous plants that have been cut, dried, and stored for use as animal feed.
Haverhill fever	The bacillary form of rat-bite fevers, due to Streptobacillus moniliformis, and transmitted through contaminated raw milk and its products. Characterised by moderate fever, joint pain, and a diffuse red rash, located mostly on the hands and feet	It was first described in Haverhill, Massachusetts United States, in 1926.
Humidifier fever	Fever following exposure to amoebae, bacteria, and fungi found in humidifier reservoirs, air conditioners and aquaria.	Acquired from humidifiers.
Izumi fever	A form of Pseudotuberculosis caused by Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. First described as a scarlet fever-like febrile disease in Japan in 1929.	Named after the discoverer.
Jaccoud's dissociated fever	A form of febrile meningitic fever accompanied by a paradoxical slow and irregular pulse rate, seen in patients with tuberculous meningitis.	Named after Sigismond Jaccoud, a Swiss physician (1830–1913), who described it.
Jamshedpur fever	A historical febrile disease of children characterised by sudden onset fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, convulsions, drowsiness, hypoglycaemia, high mortality and fatty changes on liver necropsy. Now believed to be Reye's syndrome because of close similarities in clinical presentation.	So named because it caused a mysterious fatal epidemic in 1954 in the town of Jamshedpur in Bihar, India.
Katayama fever	Acute schistosomiasis – seen after acute infection with S. mansoni or Japonicum; characterised by fever, urticarial rash, bronchospasm and hepatosplenomegaly due to immune complex formation.	Katayama is a town in Japan where the disease is endemic.
Lassa fever	An acute viral hemorrhagic fever due to the Lassa virus	First described in 1969 in the town of Lassa, in Borno State, Nigeria.
Metal fume fever	Also known as Monday morning fever – an illness caused primarily by exposure to certain fumes. Workers breathe in fumes from chemicals such as zinc oxide (ZnO) or magnesium oxide (MgO), which are themselves created by heating or welding certain metals, particularly galvanized steel.	Named derived from exposure to metal fumes.
Omsk Hemorrhagic fever is the virus	Caused by the Omsk Hemorrhagic Fever Virus (OHFV), a member of the Flavivirus family.	Virus was discovered after a outbreak between 1945 and 1947 in Omsk, Russia.
O’nyong-nyong fever	A togavirus infection transmitted by bites from anopheline mosquitoes; characterised by polyarthritis, rash and fever.	The name comes from the Nilotic language of Uganda and Sudan and means “weakening of the joints”.
Oroya fever	Acute bartonellosis; Also known as Carrion's disease – due to bacterium Bartonella bacilliformis; characterised by fever and anaemia.	Oroya is city in Peru where the 1st outbreak occurred in 1875.
Pappataci fever	Also known as Phlebotomus fever or sandfly fever – a vector-borne febrile arboviral infection caused by three serotypes of Phlebovirus (sandfly).	Name ‘Pappataci’, comes from the Italian word for sandfly.
Paratyphoid fever	Infectious disease similar to typhoid, though usually milder, caused by any of several organisms: Salmonella paratyphi (paratyphoid A), S. schottmulleri (paratyphoid B), or S. hirschfeldii (paratyphoid C).	So named because of similarity with typhoid fever.
Parrot fever	Also known as Psittacosis – caused Chlamydophila psittaci infects birds and sometimes human. Severe atypical pneumonia most prominent manifestation in humans.	Contracted from parrots, pigeons, sparrows, hens, ducks.
Pontiac fever	A nonpneumonic variant of Legionella infection	Named after an outbreak in Pontiac, Michigan, in 1968.
Puerperal fever	Also called childbed fever; presents as fever during or shortly after childbirth, miscarriage or abortion.	Named derived from the Latin puer, male child (boy), purperium is the period following delivery.
‘Q’ fever	Caused by bacterium Coxiella burnetii; most common manifestations are flu-like symptoms, fever, malaise, headache myalgia, and joint pains.	Q stands for query – ‘Q’ was used because causative agent was unknown at time of first outbreak.
Rabbit fever	Also known as Tularemia – potentially fatal infectious disease of animals and man caused by the bacterium Francisella tularensis.	Discovered in 1911 during an outbreak of rabbit fever, when the disease killed a large number of ground squirrels in the area of Tulare Lake in California
Rat bite fever	Febrile human illness caused by two types of anaerobic bacteria transmitted by rodents, rats in most cases, which is passed from rodent to human via the rodent's urine or mucous secretions.	The majority of cases are due to the animal's bite
Relapsing fever	Caused by certain bacteria in the genus Borrelia, transmitted through the bites of lice or soft-bodied ticks., characterised by sudden fever, chills and joint pains.	So named because of characteristics relapsing febrile episodes – fever that persist for 2–9 days, and then disappear to recur.
Rheumatic fever	An inflammatory disease characterised by fever, joints pains and swellings due to Group A streptococcal infection.	Similar in presentation to rheumatism.
Rift valley fever	Viral zoonosis of animals and man spread by mosquitoes and caused by rift valley virus a member of the Phlebovirus genus – Bunyaviridae family.	The virus was first identified in 1931 during an investigation into an epidemic among sheep on a farm in the Rift Valley of Kenya.
Ross river fever	Mosquito-borne infectious disease caused by infection with the Ross River virus: characterised by influenza-like illness and polyarthritis.	So named because virus was 1st isolated in 1959 from a mosquito trapped along the Ross river, in Townsville, Queensland, Australia
Scarlet fever	Characterised by fever and a red coloured rash due to exotoxin released by streptococcus pyogenes.	Named derived from characteristic scarlet-like rash – bright red colour rash.
Sennetsu fever	Caused by a bacterium named Neorickettsia sennetsu and transmitted by the ingestion of infected trematodes in raw fish. Characterised by sudden high fever, headache, muscle aches, nausea and vomiting.	Named derived from causative organism.
Spotted fevers	Rocky Mountain spotted fever is caused by Rickettsia rickettsii, a species of bacterium that is spread to humans by Dermacentor ticks. Initial signs and symptoms of the disease include sudden onset of fever, headache, and muscle pain, followed by development of rash.	The name “Rocky Mountain spotted fever” is considered a misnomer as after 1930 when it was first recognised in mountainous areas of the USA, the disease has occurred in many areas of the United States other than the Rocky Mountain region.
Trench fever	Also called five day fever-because of characteristic relapsing five day fevers. It is caused by Bartonella quintana and transmitted by body lice. Also called quintan fever, shin bone fever, tibialgic fever; characterised by high fever and headache, associated with back pain and leg pain and a fleeting rash.	So named because it was first observed in the trenches of the western front of the world war 1 due to poor hygiene and sanitary condition.
Tsutsugamushi fever	Also known as Scrub typhus. Caused by a bacterium named Orientia tsutsugamushi. Wild rodents and occasionally dogs may be hosts from where it can be carried to humans by infected mites.	The name Tsutsugamushi is derived from two Japanese words: ‘tsutsuga’, meaning something small and dangerous, and ‘mushi’, meaning creature. The infection is called scrub typhus because it generally occurs after exposure to areas with secondary (scrub) vegetation.
Typhoid fever	Also known as typhoid – a common worldwide illness, transmitted by the ingestion of food or water contaminated with the feces of an infected person which contain the bacterium Salmonella typhi.	The name of “typhoid” was given by Louis in 1829, as a derivative from typhus.
Typhus fever	Any of a group of related diseases caused by various species of rickettsia that release toxins into the blood. The bacteria are transmitted by lice, fleas, mites, and ticks. Characterised by headache, chills, fever, depression, delirium and general pains and the eruption of red rashes on the skin.	. The name comes from the Greek typhos (τŨφος) meaning smoky or hazy, describing the state of mind of those affected with typhus.
Undulant fever	Another named for brucellosis. Also called Malta fever. Caused by intracellular bacterium brucella spp. A multi-systemic disease with protean manifestations.	So named because of wave-like or undulant nature of febrile response. Named Malta fever because it first discovered in Malta during the Crimean war in the 1850s.
Uveoparotid fever	A form of Sarcoidosis characterised by low grade fever, anterior uveitis and chronic parotid swelling. Also called Heerfordt's disease.	Named derived from symptoms.
Valley fever	Also known as Coccidioidomycosis – a disease caused by fungi – Coccidioides immitis and C. posadasii species; present with either no symptoms or mild symptoms in immunocompetent individuals. May disseminate to affect lung, skin, brain, skeleton and other body areas.	So named because of outbreaks in endemic regions such as San Joaquin Valley or Bakersfield, California, and Tucson, Arizona, or parts of southern New Mexico or west Texas.
West Nile fever	First clinical phase of infection by West Nile virus transmitted by mosquitoes; infects birds, man and other animals. Characterised by fever, headache and lymphadenopathy.	First isolated from a feverish 37 year old woman at Omogo in the West Nile District of Uganda in 1937 during research on yellow fever virus.
Yellow fever	A viral haemorrhagic fever caused by the yellow fever virus and transmitted by bite of female mosquitoes. Characterised by fever, nausea, and in severe cases jaundice due to liver damage.	So named because characteristic symptom-jaundice or yellow eyes.

Concluding remarks
Fever is recognised an ancient adaptive compensatory defence mechanism leading to immune activation, decrease in bacterial and viral growth rate, and improve host survival in response to invasion by foreign antigens [60]. However, fever is not without its ill-effects, especially in cases of very high fevers, or when high fever is associated with co-morbidities such as severe sepsis, and pre-existing cardiopulmonary disease [60]. It has been suggested that fever is necessary for evolutionary survival of species by accelerating the recovery of infected individuals with localised or mild to moderately severe systemic infections while hastening the demise of hopelessly infected individuals, who pose a threat of epidemic disease to the species [60], [61]. Therefore for some, fever may be a blessing, while for others a curse.
In view of its integral role in the pathogenesis of diseases, fever will remain a cardinal manifestation of old, new and emerging diseases, whether infectious and non-infectious disease. It is therefore imperative for scientist and clinicians alike to continue to harness and expand knowledge gained so far in the understanding of the febrile response in order to improve on the diagnosis, prevention and management of the numerous diseases characterised by fever.
